Change the Listener documentation (#326)
stackabletech/listener-operator: docs/modules/listener-operator/pages/listenerclass.adoc

= ListenerClass
:description: The ListenerClass defines listener types and exposure rules for Kubernetes Pods, supporting various service types like ClusterIP, NodePort, and LoadBalancer.

A ListenerClass defines a category of listeners and how to expose them in your specific Kubernetes environment.
Think of it as a policy that says "when an application asks for 'external-stable' networking, here's how we provide it in this cluster.

== Common Examples

=== Cloud Environment (GKE, EKS, AKS)

> In managed cloud environments, you typically want to use LoadBalancers since nodes are short-lived:

Reviewer: Do we wanna mention that this comes at a cost (money-wise)?

Author: It is mentioned further down below. I'd say that is enough. Okay for you?

[source,yaml]
----
include::example$listenerclass-public-gke.yaml[]
----

=== On-Premise Environment

> In on-premise clusters with stable, long-lived nodes, NodePort is often preferred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In on-premise clusters with stable, long-lived nodes, a NodePort Service is often preferred.
```

> Sometimes these clusters don't even have the necessary LoadBalancer infrastructure in place:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes these clusters lack the necessary LoadBalancer infrastructure:
```

====
+
.To recover from node failures:
1. `kubectl delete pvc <listener-pvc-name>` - Allows the pod to reschedule (address may change)
2. Or restore/replace the failed node with the same identity
+
This does _not_ require any particular networking setup, but is best suited for environments with reliable, long-lived nodes.

* **ephemeral-nodes**: Uses LoadBalancer for stable external access, allowing pods to move freely between nodes but requires LoadBalancer infrastructure

Managed cloud environments should generally already provide an integrated LoadBalancer controller.
For on-premise environments, an external implementation such as https://docs.tigera.io/calico/latest/networking/configuring/advertise-service-ips[Calico] or https://metallb.org/[MetalLB] can be used.

NOTE: K3s' built-in https://docs.k3s.io/networking#service-load-balancer[ServiceLB] (Klipper) is _not_ recommended, because it doesn't allow multiple Services to bind the same Port.
If you use ServiceLB, use the `stable-nodes` preset instead.

== Creating Custom ListenerClasses

> If the presets don't meet your needs, you can create custom ListenerClasses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If these presets are inadequate, you can create custom ListenerClasses.
```

kind: ListenerClass
metadata:
  name: my-custom-lb
spec:
  serviceType: LoadBalancer
  loadBalancerClass: "example.com/my-loadbalancer"
----

[#servicetype-loadbalancer-nodeportallocation]
==== Disabling NodePort Allocation

By default, LoadBalancer services https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#load-balancer-nodeport-allocation[also create NodePorts].

This can be disabled using the `ListenerClass.spec.loadBalancerAllocateNodePorts` field.

NOTE: `loadBalancerAllocateNodePorts` is _only_ respected when using the xref:#servicetype-loadbalancer[] service type. Otherwise, the field will be ignored.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: listeners.stackable.tech/v1alpha1
kind: ListenerClass
metadata:
  name: lb-no-nodeports
spec:
  serviceType: LoadBalancer
  loadBalancerAllocateNodePorts: false
----

[#addresstype]
=== Address Types

Control whether clients receive IP addresses or hostnames:

`IP`:: Returns IP addresses (more compatible, less predictable especially for ClusterIP services)
`Hostname`:: Returns DNS hostnames (requires proper DNS setup)
`HostnameConservative`:: _(default)_ Uses hostnames for LoadBalancer/ClusterIP, IPs for NodePort

> This means that we default to hostnames where "safe", but don't assume that nodes are resolvable by external clients.

Author: New suggestion:

> LoadBalancer and ClusterIP services typically have reliable DNS names, but node hostnames may not be resolvable by external clients, so NodePort services get IP addresses instead.

> This means that we default to hostnames where "safe", but don't assume that nodes are resolvable by external clients.

Reviewer 2: perfect, thanks!
